Title: Self-supervised pretraining for an iterative image size agnostic vision transformer

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20392v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:45:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Self-supervised pretraining for an iterative image size agnostic vision transformer 

Nedyalko Prisadnikov 1, Danda Pani Paudel 1, Yuqian Fu 1, and Luc Van Gool 1 

> 1

INSAIT, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Bulgaria +10% 

Fig. 1: Computational Efficiency and Scaling. (Left & Middle) Latency and GFLOPs of a standard ViT versus our foveal model (evaluated sequentially over 8 steps with a learned gaze policy). While standard ViT compute scales quadratically with the number of patches, our dynamic model maintains a strictly O(1) footprint. (Right) ImageNet-1K Top-1 accuracy across extreme evaluation resolutions. All models are pretrained using an effective global crop size of 256 × 256 . While standard ViTs collapse at ultra-high resolutions ( >1024) due to patch distribution shift, our image-size agnostic approach maintains robust performance, outperforming the supervised baseline [44] by +10% .

Abstract. Vision Transformers (ViTs) dominate self-supervised learn-ing (SSL). While they have proven highly effective for large-scale pre-training, they are computationally inefficient and scale poorly with im-age size. Consequently, foundational models like DINO are constrained to low-resolution processing. A recent foveal-inspired transformer [44] achieves resolution agnosticism by iteratively processing a fixed-size con-text of multi-zoom patches. This model demonstrated promising results via supervised learning, utilizing a sequential, recurrent-like process with-out backpropagation through time. To unlock its potential as a founda-tional backbone, we introduce a novel sequential-to-global SSL framework based on DINO’s self-distillation objective. Supported by an efficient integral-image patch extraction method, our approach enables large-scale pretraining for image-size agnostic vision encoders. We achieve compet-itive performance on ImageNet-1K and downstream classification tasks, maintaining a constant computational budget regardless of input resolu-tion. 

Keywords: Self-supervised learning · Vision transformers · Active vi-sion  

> arXiv:2604.20392v1 [cs.CV] 22 Apr 2026 2N. Prisadnikov et al.

# 1 Introduction 

Self-supervised learning (SSL) serves as the backbone of modern foundational models, driving breakthroughs in both computer vision [9, 10, 25, 26, 41, 51] and natural language processing (NLP) [5, 17, 32, 34, 43, 46, 47]. By alleviat-ing the burden of large-scale manual annotation, SSL enables pretraining at an unprecedented scale. Within computer vision, this progress has been largely fu-eled through the Vision Transformer (ViT [19]) architecture. ViT-based encoders have become the standard for state-of-the-art vision models [9,41,51] and the vi-sual components of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [20,45,54,62]. Despite this success, the standard ViT architecture presents significant chal-lenges regarding efficiency. Modern visual streams – from high-resolution cameras to robotic sensors – contain tens or hundreds of megapixels. Yet, foundational models like DINO are largely restricted to pretraining on small resolutions (typ-ically 224 × 224 ). This limitation stems from the architecture’s computational complexity, which scales poorly with the input image size. To address this, recent work [44] argues that vision encoders should be image-size agnostic and task-driven. It proposed a dynamic, active vision transformer inspired by the foveal structure of the human visual system. Instead of process-ing a full grid of patches at once, the model operates iteratively. At each step, it processes a small, fixed number of “multi-zoom” patches around a chosen gaze location, maintaining a set of learnable state tokens that act as an evolving in-ternal memory between steps. Crucially, these multi-zoom patches are extracted in a top-down manner: their dimensions are defined as a ratio of the overall image size rather than a fixed absolute pixel count. Because standard ViTs ex-tract fixed-size patches (e.g. 16 × 16 pixels), increasing input resolution alters the semantic content within a single patch, leading to a distribution shift [52] and performance collapse (Fig. 1, right). By utilizing ratio-based patches, the foveal approach eliminates this distribution shift. A reinforcement learning pol-icy then dictates the sequence of gaze locations, creating a recurrent-like system that accumulates scene understanding without backpropagation through time (BPTT) [58]. While this architecture is promising, its initial validation was limited to supervised learning on ImageNet-1k [16]. For such a dynamic foveal architec-ture to serve as a true foundational backbone, it must be compatible with self-supervised pretraining. However, adapting state-of-the-art SSL frameworks like DINO [9] to a recurrent-like, stop-gradient architecture is highly non-trivial due to the sequential nature of the model. Furthermore, the patch extraction mechanism in [44] scales computationally with image resolution. This creates a bottleneck that prevents true image-size agnosticism, particularly under the high-throughput demands of training. In this paper, we resolve both of these critical limitations. We demonstrate, for the first time, that a dynamic foveal transformer can be pretrained in a self-supervised manner without BPTT. We achieve this by radically adapting the DINO self-distillation objective. Standard DINO utilizes a spatial multi-crop setting [8], matching local spatial crops to global spatial views. We formulate a Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 3

novel sequential-to-global distillation process. We demonstrate that a sequence of foveal glimpses can be treated analogously to the standard random resized local crops of DINO, training the sequentially evolving state tokens to match the embeddings of a standard, global ViT teacher. This hybrid formulation teaches the model to dynamically assemble a global understanding of the scene from iterative, local multi-zoom views. The main contributions of this work are as follows: 

– We propose a sequential-to-global self-supervised pretraining frame-work for dynamic vision transformers. By mapping sequences of local foveal glimpses to global spatial views without BPTT, we achieve a model capa-ble of evolving its scene representation iteratively while leveraging DINO’s self-distillation objective. 

– We extend the multi-zoom patch mechanism from [44] by introducing a 

dense foveal grid (Sec. 3.2) around the center of gaze. This provides a richer, high-resolution context for the self-attention mechanism. 

– We introduce an efficient patch extraction method (Sec. 3.2) based on integral images. By isolating the resolution-dependent computation to a single, one-time preprocessing step, the subsequent iterative extraction of foveal patches becomes constant with respect to image size. See comparison with [44] in Fig. 2. We validate our learned representations on ImageNet-1K [16] through linear probing. Operating as a standard ViT, our ViT-Small equivalent achieves 76% top-1 accuracy, competitive with DINO [9]. Crucially, in its dynamic 8-step foveal mode, a learned gaze policy yields 75% accuracy – significantly outperforming random gazes (71.7%). Although standard classification limits the spatial search advantages of an active policy, these results prove our model can build accurate global repre-sentations from sparse, localized glimpses. Most importantly, it achieves this with a fixed per-step computational budget decoupled from input resolution. Consequently, our image-size agnostic approach avoids the standard ViT per-formance collapse when evaluated on significantly larger images compared to training (Fig. 1). 

# 2 Preliminaries 

As outlined in the introduction, our method builds upon the dynamic, fovea-inspired vision transformer proposed by Prisadnikov et al. [44]. To keep this paper self-contained, this section briefly reviews the core architectural setting introduced in that work. Subsequently, in Sec. 3, we present our contributions and detail the proposed self-supervised pretraining framework. 

2.1 Overall Architecture 

The dynamic foveal encoder from [44] consists of three main components: 1) a 

Transformer backbone that serves as the primary visual processor; 2) a Task 4 N. Prisadnikov et al. 

Head that decodes the transformer’s latent state into task-specific predictions (e.g., classification logits); and 3) a Gaze Policy that determines the fixation point (x, y ) for the subsequent iteration, effectively dictating where to look next. Architecturally, the main processor is identical to a standard Vision Trans-former (ViT), with the primary distinction being the inclusion of multiple CLS 

tokens. These multiple CLS tokens represent the evolving latent state, acting as the model’s working memory of the scene explored thus far. As this working memory is a bottleneck, using multiple state tokens increases its representational capacity. It shares similarities with the object queries used in DETR [7] and the register tokens introduced in [15]. The processing unfolds iteratively. At the initial step ( t = 1 ), the state tokens 

s1 are initialized as learned embeddings. The policy network takes s1 as input and predicts the first gaze location. Following this, a set of multi-zoom patches p1

(Sec. 2.3) is extracted around this gaze location. The transformer then processes the sequence of concatenated tokens [s1, p 1]. The output corresponding to the input state tokens becomes the updated state s2 for the next step. At this point, the task head can process s2 to yield the final prediction, or the policy can process s2 to select a new gaze location, extract new patches p2, and run the transformer again to produce s3. This active exploratory process continues as long as necessary for the task, or for a predefined number of steps. It is important to note that while the sequence of state tokens st is reminiscent of a hidden state in a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), no Backpropagation Through Time is applied. Before st is fed into the t-th iteration of the trans-former, it is detached from the computation graph. Consequently, no gradients flow across different temporal steps, ensuring training remains efficient. 

2.2 Gaze Policy 

The gaze policy is the defining component that separates this active architec-ture from standard, passive ViT encoders. Given the current state tokens st, the goal of the policy is to predict the continuous coordinates (x, y ) of the next gaze fixation. Because the patch extraction process is non-differentiable, the policy is trained separately from the main transformer via Reinforcement Learning (RL). Both in our work and in [44], the policy is trained using policy gradient optimiza-tion [59], specifically leveraging a variant of Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [50]. 

2.3 Multi-zoom Top-Down Patches 

In order to be image size agnostic, the input context to the transformer must remain fixed in length; i.e., the number of patches fed to the transformer at every step must be independent of the input image resolution. Furthermore, these patches must be extracted in a top-down manner, meaning that the crop size representing a patch is defined as a relative ratio of the image dimensions. This contrasts sharply with the bottom-up approach of standard ViTs, which extracts patches based on a fixed pixel grid (e.g., 16 × 16 pixels). As discussed Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 5256 512 1024 2048 

> Image Resolution
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> 22
> 24
> Time (ms)
> Inference Latency (ms)
> Supervised
> Ours

Fig. 2: Foveal Extraction Latency. Me-dian latency for extracting 1,000 patches (10 steps of 100 patches) from a single im-age, simulating a high-throughput training workload. Including running the models. Compared to the supervised baseline [44], our integral image approach reduces over-head. The increase of latency with image size reflects the one-time cost for convert-ing the image into a integral one. 

in the introduction, the bottom-up approach suffers from distribution shifts: if the image resolution is increased post-training, a 16 × 16 patch captures a significantly smaller semantic region, forcing the tokenizer to process unfamiliar levels of detail [52]. As demonstrated in Fig. 1 this can lead to performance collapse when the size disparity is large. In the framework of [44], a patch can be any square crop of the image. Regardless of its original crop size, the region is simply resized to a fixed di-mension ( 16 × 16 pixels) before being processed by the PatchEmbed tokenizer. This mechanism resembles biological vision. A patch derived from a small crop will maintain high resolution (retaining fine details after resizing) but will have narrow spatial coverage, akin to the 1◦-2◦ central angle of the human fovea. Conversely, a patch derived from a large crop will cover a broad region of the image but lose high-frequency details during resizing, similarly to our low-acuity peripheral vision. Specifically, the multi-zoom patch mechanism extracts a sequence of M con-centric patches sharing the same gaze center (x, y ), with crop sizes growing exponentially. The side length of each square crop, Spatch , is defined as: 

Spatch = min( H, W )2z , z ∈ linspace(0 .0, 5.0, M ) (1) where H and W denote the image height and width, and z represents the zoom level. Examples of these extracted multi-zoom patches are illustrated in Fig. 4. 

# 3 Method 

This section details our framework for training a dynamic active vision trans-former. We first introduce our novel sequential-to-global self-supervised pretrain-ing objective (Sec. 3.1). We then describe the mechanisms that enable resolution-agnostic, O(1) foveal extraction (Sec. 3.2), and finally outline the reinforcement learning formulation used to train the active gaze policy (Sec. 3.3). 6 N. Prisadnikov et al. Student  Student  ...  

> Teacher
> Dino Head Dino Head
> Stop
> Gradient
> Stop
> Gradient
> Dino Head

Fig. 3: Main architecture for sequential-to-global pretraining. The student network iteratively updates its state tokens, computing the distillation loss at each step against a static teacher embedding. Stop-gradients prevent backpropagation through time. 

3.1 Sequential-to-Global Self-Supervised Pretraining 

Our pretraining approach builds upon the self-distillation framework of DINO [9, 41,51]. Standard DINO trains a student network to match a momentum-updated teacher network by comparing different spatial crops of the same image, typically teaching local-to-global correspondence. We fundamentally extend this paradigm to a sequential-to-global framework, training an iterative foveal model to accu-mulate scene understanding over time without backpropagation through time (BPTT). 

Implicit Cropping via Top-Down Grids. Standard ViTs crop and resize the image before dividing it into bottom-up patches. To maintain image-size agnosticism, we replace cropping with implicit top-down grid sampling. To sim-ulate a DINOv2 global crop (i.e., a 224 × 224 pixel area divided into 14 × 14 pixel patches, yielding a spatial grid of 16 × 16 patches), we simply center a foveal grid (Sec. 3.2) at the crop’s intended location on the original, unresized image. The zoom level is adjusted so the foveal grid mathematically covers the exact same area ratio as the target crop. This allows us to extract standard DINO views efficiently in a top-down manner. Refer to the supplementary material for the exact area-to-zoom mathematical mapping. 

Sequential-to-Global Distillation. Instead of relying strictly on indepen-dent spatial augmentations, we introduce an iterative, step-wise sequence of views. We define three distinct view types for a single image: 1. Global view: A spatial grid of 16 × 16 foveal patches covering > 0.32 of the image area. 2. Local view: A spatial grid of 7 × 7 foveal patches covering < 0.32 of the image area. Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 7

3. Sequential view: A dynamic sequence of 8 random foveal glimpses pro-cessed iteratively, with state tokens passed between steps. As in DINO, the networks receive asymmetric views. The teacher processes one global view and one sequential view, but only generates target embeddings from the final step of the sequence. The student processes a different global view, 8 independent local views, and a different sequential view. Crucially, for the sequential view, the student considers the output at every step. As illustrated in Fig. 3, after each foveal glimpse, the student’s current state is projected to match the teacher’s static targets. Between steps, gradients are stopped. This forces the student to iteratively approximate the global context from local multi-zoom patches while preventing the computational explosion of BPTT. We compute the loss by matching all student outputs to all teacher outputs. Note that Fig. 3 shows only a single teacher-student combination for simplicity. 

Objective and Projection Head. We optimize the standard cross-entropy loss L = − P pt log ps, utilizing the Sinkhorn-Knopp online clustering from DI-NOv2 [41]. Standard DINO models project a single [CLS] token through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) head. Because our dynamic transformer maintains mul-tiple state tokens ( Nstate ), we apply the projection MLP exclusively to the first state token. This design explicitly bottlenecks the high-level semantic under-standing required for the DINO objective into this primary token, leaving the remaining tokens to function freely as unconstrained internal memory between glimpses. The result of this training process is a hybrid transformer capable of operating natively as a standard ViT (using a single global top-down grid) or as an active foveal transformer with iterative memory. In the supplementary material, please find a simplified pseudo-code of the training loop. 

3.2 Efficient Foveal Extraction 

To enable the sequential processing described above, the model requires a con-text that captures both broad peripheral understanding and fine-grained central details, without scaling computationally with the image resolution. 

Augmenting Multi-Zoom Context with a Foveal Grid. While the loga-rithmic multi-zoom patches from [44] provide excellent peripheral context, they yield a sparse representation of the high-resolution center. To provide sufficient granular context for the self-attention mechanism, we introduce a Focused Foveal Grid : a dense G × G grid of patches extracted around the gaze center. Since G is a fixed constant, the total sequence length of the composite context (multi-zoom + foveal grid) remains strictly constant regardless of input resolution. Unlike standard bottom-up ViT patches where the token count scales with image area, our grid is top-down . The side length of each patch is defined relative to the im-age dimensions ( Spatch = min( H, W )/2z , where z is the zoom level). The zoom level z is selected from a predefined zoom range which determines the spatial coverage of the foveal grid (independently from the image size). See an example 8 N. Prisadnikov et al. b) Foveal Grid  c) Multi-zoom a) Image  

> Fig. 4: Combining multi-zoom patches with focused grid of patches for informative context for the transformer. a) Shows the input image with the bounding-boxes of the multi-zoom crops (blue) and the foveal grid crops (red) overlayed, b) shows the extracted grid patches, and c) shows the multi-zoom patches. Note that the patches are allowed to span outside the image area by filling them with zero padding.

foveal context in Fig. 4. The details of the top-down foveal grid formulation is presented in the supplementary material. 

Resolution-Agnostic Extraction via Integral Images. Although top-down patching fixes the token count, standard patch extraction operations still exhibit linear complexity O(Hc × Wc) with respect to the crop’s pixel count. To elimi-nate this bottleneck, we utilize an Integral Image (Summed-Area Table) [13, 56] representation. By pre-computing the integral image in a single pass, we can ex-tract and resize any rectangular patch using standard box-filtering. This reduces the amortized cost of iterative patch extraction to O(1) time complexity per target pixel, decoupling our dynamic foveal operations from the source image size (Fig. 2). Note that the conversion of the image to an integral one is per-formed only once per image and then we can efficiently extract many patches. More details on extracting patches from integral images can be found in the supplementary material. 

3.3 Gaze Policy Optimization via GRPO 

The final component of our framework is the active gaze policy, which directs the frozen transformer where to look based on the evolving internal state. 

Policy Distribution. Because the composite foveal context is defined only the gaze center, the policy only needs to predict the relative (x, y ) coordinates for the next fixation. As optimal gaze locations are often highly multi-modal (e.g., multiple distinct object parts), a single Gaussian is insufficient. We formulate the policy as a continuous Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with a fixed diagonal variance schedule. Architecturally, the policy is parameterized by a lightweight transformer that processes the Nstate memory tokens alongside learnable query tokens, which predict the spatial means and mixture weights for each GMM component. 

Optimization Objective. We optimize the policy using a variant of Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) featuring per-image and per-step return normalization. For a given image, we collect a group of G traces, where each Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 9

trace oi consists of T sequential steps. The immediate reward Ri,t at step t is defined as the predicted probability of the ground-truth class y given the task head τ :

Ri,t = P(τ (st+1 ) = y). (2) We compute discounted returns Gi,t = PTt′=t γt′−tRi,t and calculate group-normalized advantages ˆAi,t = ( Gi,t − ¯Gt)/ˆσ(Gt). By rewarding the policy based on the classification confidence at each step, the model learns to actively seek out discriminative spatial regions that maximize the frozen backbone’s under-standing of the scene. In essence our approach to the gaze policy optimization mimicks the one from [44] besides using a different immediate reward. We found that this reward yields slightly better performance than the ones used in [44]. 

# 4 Architectures 

Main Transformer. We adopt the ViT-Small architecture [19] following the DI-NOv2 [41] implementation, modified for active foveal vision as proposed in [44]. The network consists of 12 blocks with an embedding dimension of 384 dis-tributed across 6 attention heads. We maintain Nstate = 8 internal state tokens and use a patch size of 16x16 pixels (i.e., each extracted foveal crop is resized to a 16x16 spatial grid before tokenization). 

DINO Projection Head. Following DINOv2 [41], we apply a 3-layer MLP projection head exclusively to the first state token. This structural bottleneck explicitly forces the first state token to accumulate a high-level semantic under-standing of the scene. The head projects the token into a 65,536-dimensional space to match the cluster prototypes in the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm. (Note: Attempts to pool all state tokens using a transformer-based head led to repre-sentational collapse, likely because an identical meta [CLS] token across both teacher and student bypasses the need to align the actual state tokens). 

Task Head. Because we evaluate our representations via linear probing and classification, the task head maps the frozen network’s output to dataset-specific class logits. We evaluate two designs: a linear layer applied strictly to the first state token, and a single-layer transformer that pools information across all 

Nstate tokens before projection. Empirically, the simpler linear head performs best on ImageNet-1K [16], while the transformer head excels on fine-grained datasets requiring accumulated details, such as CUB-200-2011 [57] and Oxford 102 Flowers [37]. 

Gaze Policy. We parameterize the active vision policy as a 6-block transformer that outputs the parameters of a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). To predict the parameters for Nmixture components, the network processes the Nstate state tokens alongside Nmixture + 1 learnable query tokens. The first Nmixture queries predict the spatial means of the Gaussian components, while the final query outputs the categorical logits for the mixture weights. 10 N. Prisadnikov et al.                            

> Table 1: Main Results (Top-1 Accuracy). Evaluation of our frozen sequential-to-global representations via linear probing on ImageNet-1K, CUB, and Flowers. We compare the model operating as a dense, static ViT against its dynamic foveal modes (Random Gazes vs. Learned Policy). The dynamic mode results are reported after 8 iterative steps.
> ImageNet CUB Flowers Variant ViT Rand Policy ViT Rand Policy ViT Rand Policy Ours 76.1 71.7 75.0 81.1 73.8 80.5 98.3 97.6 97.7 DINO 77 78.6 †96.4 Supervised [44] 60.0 65.0
> †Baseline performance reported by [12].

# 5 Experiments 

We evaluate our sequential-to-global framework primarily on ImageNet-1K [16], a standard benchmark for validating self-supervised representations. To assess the generalizability and rich contextual detail of our learned representations, we further evaluate the frozen model on fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) benchmarks: CUB-200-2011 [57] and Oxford 102 Flowers [37]. 

5.1 Implementation Details 

Our pipeline consists of three distinct modules: the main foveal transformer, the task-specific classification head, and the active gaze policy. We train these com-ponents in a sequential three-stage pipeline. During each stage, all components trained in previous stages are frozen :1. Self-Supervised Pretraining: The main foveal transformer is pretrained on ImageNet-1K without labels using our sequential-to-global distillation objective. 2. Linear Probing (Task Head): The transformer is frozen. We train a linear classification head specific to the target dataset, analogous to the standard DINO linear evaluation protocol. We use random gaze locations to sample input state for the task head. 3. Policy Learning: Both the transformer and task head are frozen. We train the task-specific active gaze policy via GRPO to optimize glimpse locations. 

5.2 Pretraining Setup 

We instantiate our main transformer using the ViT-Small architecture. The model is pretrained on ImageNet-1K with a batch size of 1024. We use a base learning rate of 0.002, applying a linear warmup for the first 10 epochs followed by a cosine decay schedule [33]. Following DINO [9], the weight decay follows a cosine schedule from 0.04 to 0.4, and the student temperature τs is fixed at Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 11                          

> Table 2: Sequential Evaluation on ImageNet-1K. Step-by-step Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet in dynamic iterative mode. The active gaze policy consistently outper-forms random glimpses, and the dynamic model demonstrates monotonic accumulation of scene understanding over time, remaining competitive with standard DINOv1 base-lines.
> Variant Step 12345678Random Gazes 45.5 57.3 62.9 66.3 68.4 70.0 70.9 71.7 w/ Policy 57.7 66.7 70.3 72.2 73.4 74.0 74.6 75.0

0.1 while the teacher temperature τt is linearly ramped up from 0.04 to 0.07 over the first 30 epochs. We replace DINOv1’s teacher output centering with Sinkhorn-Knopp [14] online clustering [1,41]. Code to reproduce our pretraining framework and foveal extraction will be made publicly available. 

5.3 Main Results 

For each dataset, we report performance across three evaluation modes using the exact same frozen backbone and task head: (1) ViT Mode , serving as the baseline, using a static 16x16 grid of patches covering the full image; (2) Ran-dom Gazes , processing the image sequentially over 8 steps with randomized locations; and (3) Learned Policy , processing the image sequentially guided by the trained gaze module. Results are summarized in Table 1. 

Competitive Baseline Performance. When operating in ViT mode, our self-supervised model achieves 76.1% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K. This is highly competitive with standard DINOv1 baselines, proving that our top-down implicit cropping mechanism successfully captures robust global representations. 

Efficacy of the Gaze Policy. While the dynamic foveal evaluation (75.0%) closely trails the dense ViT baseline, the learned gaze policy yields a large improvement over random gazes (71.7%), particularly in the early steps. This demonstrates the policy’s ability to actively seek highly discriminative spatial regions. Most importantly, the foveal model achieves this 75.0% accuracy with a fixed computational budget per step, independent of image size. Paving the way for pretraining on high-resolution images. 

Monotonic Accumulation of Understanding. A critical property of our sequential-to-spatial distillation is that performance consistently improves mono-tonically at each step t compared to step t − 1. We observed this consistency not just during final evaluation, but throughout the entire training process. This validates that the unconstrained state tokens successfully act as an evolving internal memory, aggregating scene context sequentially without the computa-tional overhead of backpropagation through time. 12 N. Prisadnikov et al.                       

> Table 3: Foveal grid size ablation .Results show the importance of aug-menting the multi-zoom patches with focused foveal grid of high-resolution patches around the gaze.
> Top-1 Acc Grid Size ViT Foveal 160.7 48.0 261.1 50.4 363.9 55.7 463.7 58.3 564.2 60.7
> Table 4: Number of state tokens ablation . Adding multiple state tokens has positive effect on the performance of the model, but it is not as critical as the foveal grid.
> Top-1 Acc
> Nstate ViT Foveal 162.6 59.8 463.7 60.6 864.2 60.7 16 62.8 59.7

5.4 Ablations 

We ablate the foveal grid size and the number of state tokens using a compute-efficient pretraining setup (100 epochs, reduced crop resolutions; see Supple-mentary Material for full details). To isolate the impact of these components, we evaluate the exact same frozen model under two linear probing modes: ViT 

(standard global processing [9]) and Foveal (iterative processing over 8 random gaze locations). For the Foveal evaluation, we do not train a policy; 8 random gazes provide sufficient spatial coverage to classify the image. Table 3 demonstrates that the dense foveal grid is critical. Strictly relying on multi-zoom patches starves the self-attention mechanism of high-resolution context, significantly degrading accuracy across both evaluation modes. Further-more, Table 4 ablates the temporal memory capacity via the number of state tokens ( Nstate ). While using multiple state tokens is beneficial for propagat-ing information between glimpses, adding too many yields diminishing returns. Based on this, we adopt Nstate = 8 for our primary experiments. 

# 6 Related Work 

6.1 Self-supervised Learning 

The use of self-supervised learning (SSL) to eliminate the need for manual la-bels has been a central goal since the inception of the modern deep learning era. Before SSL became a standard term in computer vision, the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community pioneered the concept of learning from data itself, leveraging the insight that language contains its own supervision: the semantic meaning of a word can be inferred from its context. Foundational works include Word2Vec [34] and GloVe [43]. The introduction of the Transformer architec-ture [55] enabled the modeling of long-range dependencies, leading to seminal models like BERT [17], which utilizes a Masked Language Modeling (MLM) ob-jective, and GPT [46], which employs a causal modeling objective. These works demonstrated the efficacy of self-supervised training at a massive scale. Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 13 

Translating SSL to computer vision initially proved challenging due to the high-dimensional, continuous nature of images compared to discrete text tokens. Early efforts focused on "pretext tasks" – auxiliary objectives derived from the image structure – such as relative patch prediction [18], jigsaw puzzle solving [38], rotation prediction [22], and generative tasks like colorization [63] and inpaint-ing [42]. A major paradigm shift occurred with contrastive learning , which moved away from handcrafted pretext tasks toward instance discrimination: minimiz-ing the distance between augmented views of the same image while maximizing the distance to others. SimCLR [10] established a simple framework for this us-ing the InfoNCE loss [40], while MoCo [26] addressed batch size limitations via a dynamic queue and momentum encoder. Subsequently, BYOL [24] and Sim-Siam [11] demonstrated that negative pairs were not strictly necessary, prevent-ing representational collapse through asymmetric predictor networks and stop-gradient operations. SwAV [8] introduced online clustering to the contrastive framework. Building on these, DINO [9] formulated SSL as self-distillation with no labels, showing that vision transformers trained this way learn explicit se-mantic segmentation information. Most recently, the field has explored Joint-Embedding Predictive Architec-tures [31](JEPA). Unlike generative approaches such as Masked Autoencoders [25] that reconstruct pixels, methods like I-JEPA [2] and LeJEPA [4] predict the la-tent representation of a target block given a context block. This encourages the model to capture high-level semantic structures rather than low-level high-frequency details, effectively learning an internal world model. 

6.2 Iterative Processing and Memory in Transformers 

Prisadnikov et al. [44] argue that vision encoders should operate as a sequen-tial process involving small context windows and an evolving memory, rather than processing full images in a single pass. This section reviews architectures that integrate recurrence and memory into the Transformer [55] backbone. Re-current Vision Transformers (RVTs) [21] introduce a multi-stage backbone for event-based vision, using LSTMs [27] to maintain a hidden state Ht updated with new event features. In the NLP domain, the Recurrent Memory Trans-former (RMT) [6] appends special "memory tokens" to the input sequence. Af-ter a forward pass, the output embeddings of these tokens are treated as the state and prepended to the input of the next segment, effectively extending con-text length indefinitely. Similarly, Memformer [60] utilizes an external dynamic memory module with a read/write mechanism via cross-attention. Our approach strictly follows the iterative processing proposed in [44], which is architecturally similar to RMT but applied to spatial visual exploration. Crucially, unlike RMT which uses Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) [58], we employ a truncated optimization strategy where gradients are not propagated between iterations to maintain efficiency. 14 N. Prisadnikov et al. 

6.3 Foveal-inspired vision processing 

The concept of replicating foveal active vision in neural networks dates back to seminal works like [49]. Mnih et al. [35] later introduced the Recurrent Attention Model (RAM), which processes image data using "glimpses" – concentric crops similar to the multi-zoom patches in [44]. However, these earlier works predated modern components like the Vision Transformer. More recently, the Foveated Transformer (FoveaTer) [29] employed pooling regions to perform classification using a ViT architecture. The Human Attention Transformer (HAT) [61] inte-grates visual information at two eccentricities (foveal and peripheral) to pre-dict human scanpaths – the temporal sequence of fixations and saccades [39]. This architecture mimics the biological "dual-stream" processing hypothesis [23], where the ventral stream handles object identification (high-resolution foveal) and the dorsal stream handles spatial location (low-resolution peripheral). Also relevant is Fovea-Like Input Patching (FLIP) [53], which achieves efficient seg-mentation by selectively sampling multi-resolution patches centered on objects. In the domain of active vision, EyeRobot [30] explores learning gaze policies for robotic manipulation via reinforcement learning. Gazeformer [36] and Eye-Former [28] utilize transformers to predict scanpaths in a supervised manner. Finally, Glance-or-Gaze (GoG) [3] introduces a "selective gaze" mechanism for Large Multimodal Models, dynamically choosing to consume global context or focus on high-value regions via complexity-adaptive reinforcement learning. 

# 7 Conclusion 

In this work, we presented a novel sequential-to-global self-supervised learn-ing framework that successfully adapts the spatial DINO objective to dynamic, foveal-inspired vision transformers. By combining a top-down foveal grid with a highly efficient integral-image extraction method, we completely decouple the encoder’s computational complexity from the input image resolution. Our results demonstrate that this architecture achieves competitive representation quality on ImageNet-1K and fine-grained benchmarks, enabling large-scale pretraining for image-size agnostic foundational models. 

Limitations and Future Work. A primary limitation of our current pipeline lies in the sequential training of the task head and the active gaze policy. Cur-rently, we train the task head using random gazes, freeze it, and then use its classification confidence as the reward signal to train the policy via GRPO. This creates a chicken-and-egg optimization problem: if a challenging task requires isolating a very small, specific region of the image, random gazes are unlikely to sample it frequently enough to train a robust task head. Consequently, the weak frozen head provides an inadequate reward signal to teach the policy to find that exact region. Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 15 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was partially funded by the dAIedge project (HORIZON-CL4-2022-HUMAN-02-02, Grant Agreement Number: 101120726) and the Ministry of Education and Science of Bulgaria (support for INSAIT, part of the Bulgar-ian National Roadmap for Research Infrastructure). It was also supported with computational resources provided by Google Cloud Platform (GCP). 

# References 

1. Asano, Y.M., Rupprecht, C., Vedaldi, A.: Self-labelling via simultaneous clustering and representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05371 (2019) 2. Assran, M., Duval, Q., Misra, I., Bojanowski, P., Vincent, P., Rabbat, M., LeCun, Y., Ballas, N.: Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predic-tive architecture. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 15619–15629 (2023) 3. Bai, H., Zhou, Y., Wu, Y., Chan, C.M., Wen, P., Pan, K., Han, S., Guo, Y.: Glance-or-gaze: Incentivizing lmms to adaptively focus search via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13942 (2026) 4. Balestriero, R., LeCun, Y.: Lejepa: Provable and scalable self-supervised learning without the heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08544 (2025) 5. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Nee-lakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al.: Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 1877–1901 (2020) 6. Bulatov, A., Kuratov, Y., Burtsev, M.: Recurrent memory transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , 11079–11091 (2022) 7. Carion, N., Massa, F., Synnaeve, G., Usunier, N., Kirillov, A., Zagoruyko, S.: End-to-end object detection with transformers. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 213–229. Springer (2020) 8. Caron, M., Misra, I., Mairal, J., Goyal, P., Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A.: Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 9912–9924 (2020) 9. Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., Jégou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A.: Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 9650–9660 (2021) 10. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.: A simple framework for con-trastive learning of visual representations. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 1597–1607. PmLR (2020) 11. Chen, X., He, K.: Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 15750–15758 (2021) 12. Chowdhury, A., Paul, D., Mai, Z., Gu, J., Zhang, Z., Mehrab, K.S., Campolongo, E.G., Rubenstein, D., Stewart, C.V., Karpatne, A., et al.: Prompt-cam: Making vision transformers interpretable for fine-grained analysis. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 4375–4385 (2025) 13. Crow, F.C.: Summed-area tables for texture mapping. Proceedings of the 11th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (1984), https: //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2210332 16 N. Prisadnikov et al. 14. Cuturi, M.: Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 26 (2013) 15. Darcet, T., Oquab, M., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P.: Vision transformers need reg-isters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16588 (2023) 16. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 248–255. Ieee (2009) 17. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-rectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers). pp. 4171–4186 (2019) 18. Doersch, C., Gupta, A., Efros, A.A.: Unsupervised visual representation learning by context prediction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. pp. 1422–1430 (2015) 19. Dosovitskiy, A.: An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-tion at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020) 20. Fu, Y., Wang, R., Ren, B., Sun, G., Gong, B., Fu, Y., Paudel, D.P., Huang, X., Van Gool, L.: Objectrelator: Enabling cross-view object relation understanding across ego-centric and exo-centric perspectives. In: ICCV (2025) 21. Gehrig, M., Scaramuzza, D.: Recurrent vision transformers for object detection with event cameras. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 13884–13893 (2023) 22. Gidaris, S., Singh, P., Komodakis, N.: Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07728 (2018) 23. Goodale, M.A., Milner, A.D.: Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends in neurosciences 15 (1), 20–25 (1992) 24. Grill, J.B., Strub, F., Altché, F., Tallec, C., Richemond, P., Buchatskaya, E., Do-ersch, C., Avila Pires, B., Guo, Z., Gheshlaghi Azar, M., et al.: Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 21271–21284 (2020) 25. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 16000–16009 (2022) 26. He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S., Girshick, R.: Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 9729–9738 (2020) 27. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural computation 

9(8), 1735–1780 (1997) 28. Jiang, Y., Guo, Z., Rezazadegan Tavakoli, H., Leiva, L.A., Oulasvirta, A.: Eye-former: predicting personalized scanpaths with transformer-guided reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. pp. 1–15 (2024) 29. Jonnalagadda, A., Wang, W.Y., Manjunath, B., Eckstein, M.P.: Foveater: Foveated transformer for image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14173 (2021) 30. Kerr, J., Hari, K., Weber, E., Kim, C.M., Yi, B., Bonnen, T., Goldberg, K., Kanazawa, A.: Eye, robot: Learning to look to act with a bc-rl perception-action loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10968 (2025) 31. LeCun, Y., et al.: A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review 62 (1), 1–62 (2022) Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 17 32. Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V.: Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019) 33. Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F.: Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983 (2016) 34. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word repre-sentations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013) 35. Mnih, V., Heess, N., Graves, A., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Recurrent models of visual attention. Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014) 36. Mondal, S., Yang, Z., Ahn, S., Samaras, D., Zelinsky, G., Hoai, M.: Gazeformer: Scalable, effective and fast prediction of goal-directed human attention. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1441–1450 (2023) 37. Nilsback, M.E., Zisserman, A.: Automated flower classification over a large num-ber of classes. In: Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing (Dec 2008) 38. Noroozi, M., Favaro, P.: Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 69–84. Springer (2016) 39. Noton, D., Stark, L.: Scanpaths in eye movements during pattern perception. Sci-ence 171 (3968), 308–311 (1971) 40. Oord, A.v.d., Li, Y., Vinyals, O.: Representation learning with contrastive predic-tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 (2018) 41. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., et al.: Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 (2023) 42. Pathak, D., Krahenbuhl, P., Donahue, J., Darrell, T., Efros, A.A.: Context en-coders: Feature learning by inpainting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2536–2544 (2016) 43. Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.D.: Glove: Global vectors for word repre-sentation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). pp. 1532–1543 (2014) 44. Prisadnikov, N., Paudel, D.P., Fu, Y., Van Gool, L.: Vision encoders should be image size agnostic and task driven. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16317 (2025) 45. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PmLR (2021) 46. Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I., et al.: Improving lan-guage understanding by generative pre-training (2018) 47. Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., Liu, P.J.: Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of machine learning research 21 (140), 1–67 (2020) 48. Sablayrolles, A., Douze, M., Schmid, C., Jégou, H.: Spreading vectors for similarity search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03198 (2018) 49. Schmidhuber, J., Huber, R.: Learning to generate artificial fovea trajectories for target detection. International Journal of Neural Systems 2(01n02), 125–134 (1991) 50. Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y., Wu, Y., et al.: Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 (2024) 18 N. Prisadnikov et al. 51. Siméoni, O., Vo, H.V., Seitzer, M., Baldassarre, F., Oquab, M., Jose, C., Khali-dov, V., Szafraniec, M., Yi, S., Ramamonjisoa, M., et al.: Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 (2025) 52. Touvron, H., Vedaldi, A., Douze, M., Jégou, H.: Fixing the train-test resolution discrepancy. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019) 53. Traub, M., Butz, M.V.: Looking locally: Object-centric vision transformers as foun-dation models for efficient segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02763 (2025) 54. Tschannen, M., Gritsenko, A., Wang, X., Naeem, M.F., Alabdulmohsin, I., Parthasarathy, N., Evans, T., Beyer, L., Xia, Y., Mustafa, B., et al.: Siglip 2: Multilingual vision-language encoders with improved semantic understanding, lo-calization, and dense features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14786 (2025) 55. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems 30 (2017) 56. Viola, P.A., Jones, M.J.: Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features. In: 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2001), with CD-ROM, 8-14 December 2001, Kauai, HI, USA. pp. I:511–518. IEEE Computer Society (2001). https://doi.org/10. 1109/CVPR.2001.990517 , https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2001.990517 

57. Wah, C., Branson, S., Welinder, P., Perona, P., Belongie, S., et al.: The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset. Tech. rep., Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology (2011) 58. Werbos, P.: Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it. Proceed-ings of the IEEE 78 (10), 1550–1560 (1990). https://doi.org/10.1109/5.58337 

59. Williams, R.J.: Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 229–256 (1992) 60. Wu, Q., Lan, Z., Qian, K., Gu, J., Geramifard, A., Yu, Z.: Memformer: A memory-augmented transformer for sequence modeling. In: Findings of the association for computational linguistics: AACL-IJCNLP 2022. pp. 308–318 (2022) 61. Yang, Z., Mondal, S., Ahn, S., Xue, R., Zelinsky, G., Hoai, M., Samaras, D.: Unify-ing top-down and bottom-up scanpath prediction using transformers. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1683–1693 (2024) 62. Zhai, X., Mustafa, B., Kolesnikov, A., Beyer, L.: Sigmoid loss for language im-age pre-training. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 11975–11986 (2023) 63. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A.: Colorful image colorization. In: European confer-ence on computer vision. pp. 649–666. Springer (2016) Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 19 

# A Resolution-Agnostic Patch Extraction via Integral Images 

While the top-down patch extraction proposed in [44] achieves computational independence from image size in the model architecture, the initial tokenization process remains a bottleneck. Standard patch extraction methods typically ex-hibit linear complexity O(Hc × Wc) with respect to the pixel count of the source crop, leading to increased latency when processing high-resolution inputs. Espe-cially during training where we extract hundrerds of patches per image at each step. To address this, we introduce an efficient, resolution-agnostic extraction mechanism based on Integral Images [56], originally introduced as Summed-Area Tables (SAT) by Crow [13]. Our approach decouples the computational cost of patch extraction from the source resolution. By pre-computing the integral image representation, we can extract and resize arbitrary rectangular regions into fixed-size tokens of dimension P × P (e.g., 16 × 16 ) with constant time complexity O(1) per target pixel, or O(P 2) for the entire patch. Let I ∈ RH×W denote the input image. The integral image S is defined such that S(x, y ) contains the sum of all pixels above and to the left of (x, y ):

S(x, y ) = X

> i≤x,j ≤y

I(i, j ) (3) To extract a patch, we define a grid of P ×P target cells over the continuous crop region. For a target pixel vi,j , let its corresponding source region R be bounded vertically by [yt, y b] and horizontally by [xl, x r ]. The value of vi,j is computed via box filtering :

vi,j = 1

Area (R) (S(xr , y b) + S(xl, y t) − S(xl, y b) − S(xr , y t))  (4) This formulation allows for simultaneous cropping and resizing in a single op-eration. To maximize computational throughput, we employ a nearest-neighbor approximation when mapping continuous crop coordinates to the discrete inte-gral image grid, rather than performing sub-pixel bilinear interpolation. While this introduces minor quantization noise for non-aligned crops, we observe that the resulting features maintain sufficient fidelity for the downstream transformer while reducing overhead. 

# B Foveal Grid Formulation 

As shown in the paper, extracting a grid of patches in a top-down manner is an important part of our self-supervised pretraining – either for extracting foveal grid of patches, or extracting a ViT grid of patches. Crucially, the grid of patches is extracted in a top-down manner. The size of each patch and consequently of the whole grid is defined through a zoom level z which determines the size as a function of the image size. 20 N. Prisadnikov et al. 

Grid Formulation. Let (xc, y c) denote the center of gaze coordinates. We define a focused grid of G × G number of patches (e.g. 4 × 4) where each individual patch has the same fixed zoom level z. The side length of a single patch in the grid, denoted as Spatch , is derived top-down from the image dimensions (H, W ):

Spatch = min( H, W )2z . (5) The grid covers a total region of size (G · Spatch ) × (G · Spatch ) centered at 

(xc, y c). The center coordinates (xu,v , y u,v ) for a patch at grid index (u, v ), where 

u, v ∈ { 0, . . . , G − 1}, are computed as: 

xu,v = xc +



u − G − 12



· Spatch 

yu,v = yc +



v − G − 12



· Spatch 

(6) This formulation centers the grid perfectly around the gaze point. Using the integral image method, we can extract and resize all G2 patches in parallel. This results in a composite context consisting of the logarithmic multi-zoom patches (peripheral vision) and the dense focused grid (foveal vision), while maintaining a fixed input token length. 

Simulating random resized crops. Importantly, we can use the foveal grid approach to simulate random resized crops as used in DINO’s [9] multi-crop setting [8]. Consider a DINOv2 global crop. It is a square random resized crop with scale above 0.32 , i.e. the area of the crop is at least 32% of the original image area. Then the crop is resized to 224 × 224 and split into a 16 × 16 grid of patches, i.e. the patch size 14 × 14 pixels. In DINO [9] and DINOv3 [51] the situation is the same, but with patch size of 16 , and hence the crop is resized to 256 × 256 . If we represent the global crop as a foveal grid we can simulate both the random resized crop and the patch extraction in a single step. We set 

G to 16 , then we choose zoom level range, such that the total grid area has scale between 0.32 and 1. Finally, we select the gaze center randomly so that the grid does not go beyond the image area. 

Selecting the zoom range. Without loss of generallity, let us assume that the width and height of the image are 1. Then, given a zoom level z the size of a single patch is Spatch = 1 /2z . The total area of the crop is G2/22z . In order to satisfy that the area of the crop is at least 0.32 we need 

G2

22z ≥ 0.32 22z ≤ G2

0.32 2z ≤ log 2 G2 − log 2 0.32 

z ≤ log 2 G − log 20.32 2 .

(7) Self-supervised pretraining for iterative vision transformer 21 

Similarly, we can constrain the zoom level from above such that the scale is at most 1.

# C Pseudo-code for Self-supervised Pretraining 

Here we present a pseudo-code for the self-supervised training step for our 

sequential-to-global framework in Alg. 1. Note that this is a heavily simplified version. A lot of details would be challenging to be included in an easy to di-gest pseudocode. Notably, although not included here we use KoLeo Loss [48] similarly to DINOv2 [41]. 

Algorithm 1 Self-Supervised Pretraining of Foveal Active Vision Transformer 

Require: Input images X, Student θs, Teacher θt, Steps K, Temp τs, τ t

Require: Learned state embedding estate 

# 1. Extract standard static crops and foveal multi-zoom sequences 

1: V sg , V tg , V sl ← ExtractStaticCrops (X) ▷ Global and local ViT crops 2: Ls, L t ← SampleGazeLocations (X, K )

3: V smz ← ExtractFoveal (X, L s) ▷ Shape: B × K × M × P × P × 3

4: V tmz ← ExtractFoveal (X, L t) ▷ M : Total patches per location 

# 2. Teacher forward pass (No gradients) 

5: with no gradients do 

6: Ztg ← θt(V tg , 0 + estate ) ▷ Static crops omit state tracking 7: st 

> 0

← 0 ▷ The initial state is zeroes 8: for k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } do 

9: stk , Z tmz,k ← θt(V tmz,k , s tk−1 + estate )

10: end for 

11: Ct ← SinkhornKnopp (Ztg ∪ { Ztmz,K }, τ t) ▷ Center global + final step 12: end with 

# 3. Student forward pass 

13: Zsg ← θs(V sg , estate ), Zsl ← θs(V sl , estate )

14: Lstatic ← 18 H(Zsg /τ s, C t) + 78 H(Zsl /τ s, C t) ▷ H is Cross-Entropy 

# 4. Student sequential pass (No BPTT) 

15: ss 

> 0

← 0, Lmz ← 0

16: for k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } do 

17: ssk−1 ← stop_gradient (ssk−1) ▷ Prevent backprop through time 18: ssk , Z smz,k ← θs(V smz,k , s sk−1 + estate )

19: Lmz ← L mz + H(Zsmz,k /τ s, C t)

20: end for 

21: L ← 12

 Lstatic + 1 

> K

Lmz 



# 5. Optimization 

22: θs ← θs − η∇θs L ▷ Update student via optimizer 23: θt ← λθ t + (1 − λ)θs ▷ Exponential moving average ( λ)22 N. Prisadnikov et al. 

# D Positional Embeddings for Multi-zoom Patches 

An important implementation detail not covered by the main paper is han-dling positional embeddings for multi-zoom patches. Unlike ViT patches we have patches of varying sizes (zoom levels). This adds a necessity to include a third dimension when computing the positional embeddings. Especially with the multi-zoom patches, if the positional embeddings are function of the x and y

coordinates of the patch’s center, then all the multi-zoom patches will have the same positional embedding. This is why in our work the positional embeddings are a function of (x, y, z ) – the coordinates of the center of the patch and the zoom level z.Unlike, standard ViT methods our positional embeddings are learned through a shallow multi-layer perceptron (MLP) which takes (x, y, z ) as three-dimensional input. Note that this approach introduces a major change in how random crops are represented. Take an example of a random resized crop when training a standard ViT model. The positional embeddings are such that the model perceives the crop as if it is the entire image. With our top-down approach and positional embeddings the model implicitly "knows" that the random crop is part of a bigger image. 

# E Ablation Study Implementation Details 

For the ablation studies in the paper we use a lighter setting in order to speed up the process of training. We trained the model for 100 epochs, while all scheduled hyperparameters like learning rate, weight decay, teacher momentum, teacher temperature are scheduled as if the training is 300 epochs long. We also lowered the number of patches in the grid of ViT patches during training. The global crops are still crops with scale above 0.32 , but they are split into a 12 × 12 grid of patches. Similarly the local crops are split into a 5 × 5 grid of patches. The rest of the hyper-parameters are the same as the ones used for training the main model.